1. Introduction  (noun)
1. the act of introducing or the state of being introduced.
2. a formal personal presentation of one person to another or others.
3. a preliminary part, as of a book, musical composition, or the like, leading up to the main part.
4. an elementary treatise: e.g. an introduction to botany.
5. an act or instance of inserting.

Write this later!!!

2. Ontology (noun)
1. a branch of metaphysics concerned with the nature and relations of being.
2. a particular theory about the nature of being or the kinds of things that have existence .

I would like to start by making four assumptions, which are as  non-controversial as any certain statement about reality can be. While each point may well deserve to be covered in more detail that I have here, as none of these points is the focal point of my work I feel I can be brief.

1. I exist and am aware of different overlapping realities though a combination of my senses, memory and imagination.

2. There is a universe comprised of matter, currently understood in its most basic form to be made up of elementary or fundamental particles like quarks and leptons, which go on to make up neutrons, electrons and protons which in turn make up atoms of the basic chemical elements set out in the periodic table.

3. I exist in and am aware of various aspects of this material universe through my senses. 

4. Other individuals who seemingly also possess senses, imagination and memory share this material universe with myself.

Our shared material universe has a history that we have gradually begun to uncover, and while the origins of the universe are not completely understood or easily comprehended, it is most likely that it began roughly 13.7 billion years ago. These 13.7 billion years can be divided into six ages, ‘the age of the Big Bang’, ‘the age of the Stars’, ‘the age of the Solar System’, ‘the age of Sentient Life’, ‘the age of Conscious Life’ and ‘the age of Civilisation’. The first three of these ages we will cover without going into much detail.

The first, ‘the age of the Big Bang’ was the mind bending era of the planck, grand unification, electroweak, Inflationary, quark, hadron and lepton epochs, all measured in 100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000ths of a second which ended with the photon epoch. The photon epoch started roughly 10 seconds after the birth of the universe and ended after around 400,000 years when the universe had cooled to a temperature where the first atoms, mainly helium and hydrogen had begun to form.

The second age, ‘the age of the Stars’ began as gravity crushed these new atoms into stars around 400,000 years after the moment of creation. Once these stars eventually consumed most of the hydrogen inside them through nuclear fusion almost all naturally occurring elements heavier than helium were created by stellar nucleosynthsis, and sometimes supernova nucleosynthesis when a star exploded. These new chemical elements began to spread throughout the universe.

The third age, ‘the age of the Solar System’ began for our branch of the Milky Way around 5 billion years ago when a giant cloud of matter came together and exploded into a new star, our Sun. The chemically rich left overs of this explosion made up the 8 planets in our solar system.

The next two ages, the fourth and fifth, I would call ‘the ‘age of Sentient Life’ and ‘the age of Conscious Life’. It is much harder to draw a line between these two ages than the other ages. The fourth age, ‘the age of Sentient Life’ began around 3.5 billion years ago. It was probably in volcanic vents deep under the sea where the first microbial organisms came together. This basic sentient life had four qualities:

1. Metabolism, the ability to take in energy from surroundings and keep going.
2. Homoeostasis, the ability to regulate itself and maintain stability.
3. Reproduction, the ability to create copies for preservation and continuation.
4. Adaptation, the ability to change from generation to generation.

Over time these new organisms meant that ‘the age of Sentient Life’ saw the birth of knowledge and learning, as best illustrated by Karl Popper in ‘All Life Is Problem Solving’. This process by which knowledge was created was a 3 step process consisting of:

1: Problem
2: Attempted at solution
3: Elimination

A problem arises when an organism’s expectations prove to have been incorrect. At this stage it will attempt to solve the problem through a series of testing actions. If these testing actions successfully solve the problem they will typically be remembered and repeated if the problem is encountered again. If an organism is too often disappointed in its expectations, it caves in. It cannot solve the problem and perishes. Through the miracle of DNA this knowledge was often recorded and passed down to future generations.

Over 3.5 billion years various nuggets of knowledge were recorded in the DNA of these organisms, and the tree of life developed three main branches. Bacteria, single celled prokaryotic organisms, Archaea another completely separate domain of life, and finally Eukaryota, with complex cells. These Eukaryota can be further divided into Animalia, Fungi, Amoebozoa, Plantae, Archaeplastida, Chromalveolata and Excavata. 

The fifth age, the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ began when life moved from being simply sentient to being conscious. 

Sentient (adjective)
1. Able to feel, see, hear, smell, or taste.
2. Finely sensitive in perception or feeling.

Conscious (adjective)
1. Aware of one's own existence, sensations, thoughts, surroundings, etc.
2. Capable of thought, will, or perception.

While life has always been sentient to some degree as even single celled organisms respond to the environment, it is unclear when it became conscious. While it is fairly easy to test for sentience by seeing if something  can confirm its ability to see or hear something, it is much harder to test for consciousness in the same way. Conscious life is able to have thoughts and think in a way that simple sentient life is not. When considering consciousness it is helpful to try to draw a distinction between the overlapping conscious processes of feelings, thoughts and concepts.

Feelings (noun)
1. the general state of consciousness considered independently of particular sensations, thoughts, etc. 
2. a consciousness or vague awareness: a feeling of inferiority.

Feelings are the rawest form of consciousness, feelings cannot truly be put into language. I can never sufficiently express to another being what it is to feel lonely or in love, my only hope is that they have had a similar experiences and my be able to relate in this way. 

Thought (noun)
1. meditation, contemplation, or recollection: deep in thought.
2. intention, design, or purpose, especially a half-formed or imperfect intention: We had some thought of going.

Thoughts are a level of more specific contemplation above this. These are the level of consciousness between feelings and concepts, which use a mixture of mental languages, some of which can be expressed to others, and are clearly defined and others which are neither of these things. 

Concept (noun)
1. An idea of something formed by mentally combining all its characteristics or particulars; a construct.
2. A directly conceived or intuited object of thought.

A concept is a conscious contemplation involving a clearly defined and understood idea that can be expressed using some form of communication.

It was only when life became conscious to the degree that awareness beyond the level of simple feelings was possible that it began to learn and acquire knowledge though the more complex four stage model set out by Popper shown below.

1: Original Problem
2: Formation of Tentative Theories.
3: Attempts at Elimination (through critical discussion, including experimental testing).  
4: New Problems (which arise from the critical discussion of our theories).

Maybe organic life reached a level of consciousness that used this model of acquiring knowledge when homo habilis first appeared on the Animalia branch of life anything from 2.3 to 1.4 million years ago. The Natufian hunter gather people who existed roughly 12,300 to 10,800 years ago in Lebanon, the first life forms to use sickle blades to harvest cereals were almost certainly using this new model of acquiring knowledge, as such tools were unlikely to have been developed using simple trial and error. 

The four stage model of scientific knowledge is closely tied to the complex language required to form tentative theories. Before delving any further into what changes took place in moving from the ‘Age of Sentient Life’ to the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ and how this new four stage model of knowledge and learning changed things however it is worth examining exactly what we mean when we are talking about language.

Language (noun)
1. Communication of thoughts and feelings through a system of arbitrary signals, such as voice sounds, gestures, or written symbols.
2. words of a particular kind.

Language is an ability seemingly unique to homo sapiens to acquire and use complex systems of communication, and a language is any specific example of such a system. The assertion that language is unique to homo sapiens has been disputed as animals use verbal communication to indicate danger, food, sexual arousal and a host of other things. They have a systems of communication that arguably include nouns, adjectives and verbs. For example a Meerkat can communicate the concepts of not just danger but specifically an aerial predator with either low, high or medium urgency or a terrestrial predator with low, high or medium urgency. Bottlenose dolphins discuss their names, ages, gender and location with each other across the miles of the ocean. Some people argue that a distinction however can be drawn between communication and language. To qualify as a language the system of communication must meet these six criteria.

1. Arbitrariness: there is no rational relationship between a sound or sign and its meaning, e.g. there is nothing intrinsically "housy" about the word "house".
2. Discreteness: language is composed of small, repeatable parts, discrete units, that are used in combination to create meaning.
3. Displacement: languages can be used to communicate ideas about things that are not in the immediate vicinity either spatially or temporally.
4. Duality of patterning: the smallest meaningful units (words, morphemes) consist of sequences of units without meaning (speech sounds morphemes). This is also known as called Double articulation.
5. Productivity: users can understand and create an indefinitely large number of utterances.
6. Semanticity: specific signals have specific meanings.

While some animal forms of communication may occasionally display all 6 of these requirements for definition as a language, none have the depth of vocabulary historic or modern human languages have. It is certainly true to say that complex language is unique to people, even if language is not.


Now we have a clear idea of language we can look at the birth of what we might call philosophy, that took place during the ‘Age of Conscious Life’. An octopus may be using this four stage model when it figures out how to unscrew a jar to get to the treat inside, or a crow when it bends wire to use as a tool. However without a complex shared social language, stages two and three are always undertaken by single individuals, with the ideas hidden from the rest of conscious life.

1: Original Problem
2: Formation of Tentative Theories.
3: Attempts at Elimination (through critical discussion, including experimental testing).  
4: New Problems (which arise from the critical discussion of our theories).

When complex language is used by individuals to share their ideas with others, multiplying the mental processing power applied to the formation and elimination of theories, we see philosophy taking place.

Philosophy (noun)

1. The study of the nature, causes, or principles of reality, knowledge, or values, based on logical reasoning.
2. A set of ideas about how to do something or how to live.

Philosophy is best defined in my mind as quite simply thinking where individuals are able to show their working. Once someone is thinking (not feeling or just having thoughts, but specifically thinking about something) in a way that you could clearly explain to another individual you are arguably engaging in a form of philosophy. It is possible to philosophise about if wine or beer is better or indeed no alcohol at all is preferable. It is also possible to develop a philosophy about how to travel from your house to a friends, and what is the fastest or most pleasant route. This is a very wide definition and means all fields of knowledge involve a degree of philosophy.

The combination of philosophy with this four stage model of knowledge is what I believe eventually lead to the formation of what would first be best described as rules of thumb but eventually became customs and rituals. The reason for this was almost certainly practicality and self preservation and is rooted in the distinction it is possible to draw between choices and decisions.

Choice (noun)
1. the act of picking or selecting from two or more possibilities
2.  a range of things that can be chosen

A choice is quite simply the point when something has to select between two or more options. This can be done consciously or unconsciously, my coin sorter can be thought of to choose between what coins to allow to fall through each slot. My cat can be considered to choose between using the cat flap or climbing in through the window.

Decision (noun)
1. A choice that you make about something after thinking about it : the result of deciding.
2. The ability to make choices quickly and confidently

A decision is when a choice is made after rational thinking by a conscious being. I do not decide to something if I have not actively considered the matter. I do not decide to swear when I bang my toe on the table, although I make a decision to visit doctors once the initial pain has subsided if I think it is broken. Making decisions is often incredibly hard work, and is made much easier through the development rules of thumb, which can eventually blossom into customs and rituals.

For example if I run without taking a pause to think from an animal I’m making a choice. If I am injured after I make my escape and spend a few minuets trying to figure out what plant or plants to smear on the wound I have sustained while running I’m making a decision. This decision is much more likely to be correct if I utilise the knowledge acquired through the four stage scientific model within my community. After asking a friend who suggested trying red berries, but dismissing the idea after having done this myself and been unsuccessful, but opting for yellow leaves as another friend suggested as this helped with her foot, I may slowly develop a rule of thumb to always use yellow leaves to treat a bruise. In turn over time my society may develop a custom or ritual of gathering yellow leaves for someone and smearing them on a bruise.

These customs and rituals may have even become laws. Our first laws probably related to the hunter-gatherer existence that was universal for humans until around 10,000 years ago. They may have been religious or spiritual laws, regarding how the dead should be honoured, they may have been practical laws regarding how to deal with different predators. These laws were unlikely to have been universal or uncontested, even within social groups, and before the advent of written language would have handed down by word of mouth. Once people began to record these laws using a written language, we see the start of ‘the age of Civilisation’.

As with the ‘Age of Sentient Life’ and the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ it is hard to draw a line in history and say this is when the ‘Age of Civilisation’ began. It was roughly 50,000 years ago when we guess humans developed full behavioural modernity, including language, music and other cultural universals. When did we progress from just being a community or society into a civilisation? 

I think we can draw a line between a community and a society based on the number and complexity of the rules in existence. A community does not have the abundance of all encompassing rules that a society has. A collection of individuals who simply happen to share the same space and some basic laws and customs is a community, it becomes a society when those individuals all share a large number of laws and customs that permeate most if not all aspects of life. 

Just as the change from community into society is rather subjective, so to arguably is the change from society to civilisation. We could simple argue that a society becomes a civilisation once laws are set out clearly using written language. If we draw the line for the start of ‘the age of Civilisation’ when the first written laws were established by people, we can only say with any confidence that it began roughly 5,000 years ago.

This could have been in the Jemdet Nasr period from 3,100-2,900 BCE, in Mesopotamia, where centralised buildings, administrative cuneiform tablets and seals suggest settlements were very organised, complete with a central administration regulating the economy. Similarly in 3,600 BCE the Egyptian people along the Nile River had already become a unified cultural and economic domain, with a system of writing already developed denoting 200 symbols representing speech sounds and concepts. We could be presumptuous in calling a society with written laws a civilisation however, maybe it only becomes a civilisation once a constitution for that society is set out.

Constitution (noun)
1. A body of fundamental principles or established precedents of a nation, state, or social group that determine the powers and duties of the government and guarantee certain rights to the people in it.
2. The system of beliefs and laws by which a country, state, or organisation is governed.

The earliest evidence for a known constitution was found in Mesopotamia, dating from 2,300 BCE. A constitution can be either one document or a series of documents, and can contain some unwritten aspects such as the United Kingdoms constitution. These unwritten constitutions rely on the observation of precedents, royal prerogatives, custom and tradition (such as always holding the General Election on a Thursday). In the ‘Age of Civilisation’, and indeed before, all phenomena can be considered to be sorted into at least one of the following categories.

Objects - The material things formed from the basic chemical elements laid out in the periodic table. 

Actions  - Changes that take place in objects over time, such as moving or burning.

Individuals - Objects that we recognise as conscious people.

Processes - Activities completed by individuals, these can include the manipulation of objects (including the human body) like kicking a ball or digging, or be a conscious process such as addition or subtraction.

Roles - Specific labels we apply to individuals, such as mother, tall or farmer.

Institutions - Collections of roles and objects such as a family or farm.

These all these phenomena can also be considered to exist on multiple scales of formal and informal depending on how clearly they are defined by a society or civilisation. While this is a sliding scale, I will describe a phenomena as formal if it is clearly defined in writing by a civilisation’s constitutional apparatus. Thus no truly formal phenomena exist in societies or communities. For example in a society the funeral ritual for someone killed while hunting may be to place the deceased’s body beneath any olive tree with a stone tool. This would be less formal than the burial ritual in another society where the ritual is to place the deceased’s body beneath a specific olive tree with the stone tool made by their mother. Both these rituals would be considered informal however to the funeral practices of a civilisation which are set out clearly in written language on the home cave wall which gives directions to the tree where they are to be placed (even if an object is not specified to be left with them) would be considered formal, again this would be less formal than a funeral ritual, set out in written language where both a specific location and item to be leaf with them were also documented. At times multiple societies or civilisations may define things very differently, for example one society may define a tree as the funeral tree while another society defines it as simply a tree. A more extreme example may be how the prisoners of war the one civilisation or society defines as slaves would not be defined this way by the community or society they were born into. 

During ‘the age of Civilisation’ around 500 BCE to 500 CE we saw these civilisations become states. 

State (noun)
1. a nation or territory considered as an organized political community under one government.
2. a compulsory political organization with a centralized government that maintains a monopoly of the legitimate use of force within a certain geographical territory.

States began to build empires of unprecedented size both in the number of people who lived in under them and the geographical reach of their civilisations over the thousand years from 500 BCE to 500 CE. Roughly 3 million people had lived as hunter gatherers from 35,000 BCE, but a combination of around 50 to 60 million people lived under the combined eastern and western Roman Empire of 400 CE. They had well trained armies, unifying ideologies and the advanced bureaucracies required for organisation of a large domain. 

During its spread driving ‘the of Civilisation’ the various and numerous nation states that have existed have been controlled by a host of different types of government. 

Government (noun)
1. The group of people with the authority to govern a country or state; a particular ministry in office.
2. The system by which a state or community is governed:

The different types of government that have so far existed can be classified by how many individuals take part in government, either as a monarchic for one single individual, oligarchic for a few individuals and democratic for  many individuals. There are no hard and fast rules for definition beyond, although terms like Autocracy, Constitutional Monarchy and Aristocracy are used by political scientists to refer to systems of government have have been examined, although they are are all contested terms for which many various conflicting definitions exist.

Ultimately however, whether the government consists of a lone warrior priest king or 543 representatives elected by 800 million Indian citizens individuals have had to make decisions regarding how they are governed in a variety of formal roles. The most successful of these governments have been guided by individuals who have made what we know now were the best decisions. While all manner of heuristics and superstition have informed these individuals, along with knowledge obtained from the four stage model, the sciences have arguably been the most useful source of information for individuals when faced with making a decision.

Science (noun) 
1. A branch of knowledge or study dealing with a body of facts or truths systematically arranged and showing the operation of general laws.
2. Systematic knowledge of the physical or material world gained through observation and experimentation.

Karl Popper described any knowledge gained through the four stage model he set out as scientific knowledge, and the model it self as the scientific process. I feel this definition is to wide however, to truly qualify as a science a discipline has to involve mathematics as well as language when constructing tentative theories and attempting their falsification. Interestingly organisms awareness of mathematics could well predate anything we would consider the beginning of the intelligent life, or even hominids themselves. Prehistoric people certainly may have been aware of counting, as shown by the tallies found on bones. More complex mathematics didn’t appear until around 3000 BCE though with the Babylonians and Egyptans who used arithmetic, algebra and geometry for taxation and other financial calculations along with building and construction.

Mathematics (noun)
1. A group of related disciplines, including algebra, geometry, and calculus, concerned with the study of number, quantity, shape, and space and their interrelationships by using a specialised notation.
2. Mathematical operations and processes involved in the solution of a problem or study of some scientific field

Some people would argue incorrectly that maths is simply another language. This would be incorrect however, as all language refers to specific things and concepts, rooted ultimately in one of the realities we experience. While language may refer to more abstract concepts such as justice or love, these are all rooted in an experienced reality. To demonstrate this principle try imagining something described using only non-mathematical terms that is totally abstract, rather than simply imaginary.

Mathematics refers to the totally abstract, but initially intuitively logical world of numbers and mathematical operations. These numbers can be classed as 

Counting numbers. 

Integer numbers.

Rational numbers.

Real numbers.

Complex numbers. 
(Complete later)

While there are a number of different mathematical operations, such as the integration or rearranging of an equation these are all rooted in and simple (and complex at times!!) variations and reversals of the two basic operations of addition and multiplication.

In my mind it was only when the four stage model, philosophy and mathematics are combined that the scientific process of understanding reality began. We cannot pin point when this took place, but we can certainly see where great leaps forward were made.

Cover briefly the fields of physics, 

Move to economics and politics.

Over the following 1,600 years the forces of history did sometimes hamper and indeed reverse the spread of these states and their civilisations, however from 1800 AD, just 200 years ago almost all inhabitable land on earth was covered by a state. 193 of these states have come together in the United Nations, established in 1945 CE, which covers most of the planet although some states are not members, and some of these states do not hold total control (if indeed any states can hold total control) over all of their claimed territory. Not only this but the UN has also drawn up treaties regarding activity in outer space such as the ‘Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies’. All of our material universe is now arguably formally defined by at least one civilisation. Maybe it would be most true to say ‘the Age of Civilisation’ only began when the spread of this formal world of civilisation encompassed the entirety of the material universe. Maybe it would be more true to say ‘the age of Civilisation’ began to end at this point and is due or even currently being supplanted by something else we are unable to see from the eye of the storm.
