1. Introduction  (noun)
1. the act of introducing or the state of being introduced.
2. a formal personal presentation of one person to another or others.
3. a preliminary part, as of a book, musical composition, or the like, leading up to the main part.
4. an elementary treatise: e.g. an introduction to botany.
5. an act or instance of inserting.

Write this later!!!

2. Ontology (noun)
1. a branch of metaphysics concerned with the nature and relations of being.
2. a particular theory about the nature of being or the kinds of things that have existence .

I would like to start by making four assumptions, which are as  non-controversial as any certain belief can be. While each point may well deserves to be covered in more detail that I have here, as none of these points is the focal point of my work I feel I can be brief.

1. I exist and am aware of numerous various realities though a combination of my senses, memory and imagination.

2. There is a universe comprised of elementary or fundamental particles such as quarks and leptons, which go on to make up neutrons, electrons and protons which in turn make up atoms and the basic chemical elements. 

3. I exist in and am aware of various aspects of this universe through my senses. 

4. Other individuals who also seemingly also possess senses, imagination and memory share this material universe with myself

5. While this reality is arguably objective, under any any thorough examination that has been undertaken by myself or others it ultimately appears to have a seemingly nebulous nature.

6. My understanding of all realities, including the material universe of my senses is subjective, and ultimately a social construction.

Our shared universe has a history that we have gradually begun to uncover as species and civilisation, and while the origins of the universe are not understood or indeed easily comprehended, it is almost certain that it began roughly 13.7 billion years ago. These 13.7 billion years can be divided into six ages, the first three of which we’ll cover briefly. 

The first age, the ‘Age of the Big Bang’ was the mind bending era of the planck, grand unification, electroweak, Inflationary, quark, hadron and lepton epochs, all measured in 100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000ths of a second which ended with the photon epoch. The photon epoch started roughly 10 seconds after the birth of the universe and ended after around 400,000 years when the universe had cooled to a temperature where the first atoms, mainly helium and hydrogen had begun to form.

The second age, the ‘Age of the Stars’ began as gravity crushed these new atoms into stars around 400,000 years after the moment of creation. Once these stars eventually consumed most of the hydrogen inside them through nuclear fusion almost all naturally occurring elements heavier than helium are created by stellar nucleosynthsis, and sometimes supernova nucleosynthesis when it explodes. These new chemical elements began to spread throughout the universe.

The third age, the ‘Age of our Solar System’ began around 5 billion years ago when a giant cloud of matter came together and exploded into a new star, our Sun. The chemically rich left overs of this explosion made up the 8 planets in our solar system. The dawn of the fourth age, the ‘Age of Life on Earth’, seems a prudent place to begin working on an Epistemology, alongside this Ontology.

The next two ages I would call the ‘Age of Life Sentient’ and the ‘Age of Conscious Life’. It is much harder to draw a line between these two ages than the other ages. The fourth age, the ‘Age of Life’ began around 3.5 billion years ago. It was probably in volcanic vents deep under the sea saw the first microbial organisms came together. Basic life forms have four qualities:

1. Metabolism, the ability to take in energy from surroundings and keep going.
2. Homoeostasis, the ability to regulate itself and maintain stability.
3. Reproduction, the ability to create copies for preservation and continuation.
4. Adaptation, the ability to change from generation to generation.

Over time these new organisms meant that the ‘Age of Life’ saw the birth of knowledge and learning, as best illustrated by Karl Popper in ‘All Life Is Problem Solving’. The process to create knowledge was a 3 step process:

1: Problem
2: Attempted at solution
3: Elimination

A problem arises when an organism’s expectations prove to have been incorrect. At this stage it will attempt to solve the problem through a series of testing actions. If the testing actions successfully solve the problem they will typically be remembered and repeated if the problem is encountered again. If an organism is too often disappointed in its expectations, it caves in. It cannot solve the problem and perishes. Through the miracle of DNA this knowledge was often recorded and passed down to future generations.

Over 3.5 billion years various nuggets of knowledge were recorded in the DNA of these organisms and the tree of life developed three main branches. Bacteria, single celled prokaryotic organisms, Archaea another completely separate domain of life, and finally Eukaryota, with complex cells. These Eukaryota can be further divided into Animalia, Fungi, Amoebozoa, Plantae, Archaeplastida, Chromalveolata and Excavata. 

The fifth age, the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ began when life moved from being simply sentient to being conscious. 

Sentient (adjective)
1. Able to feel, see, hear, smell, or taste.
2. Finely sensitive in perception or feeling.

Conscious (adjective)
1. Aware of one's own existence, sensations, thoughts, surroundings, etc.
2. Having the mental faculties fully active: He was conscious during the operation.

Life has always been sentient to some degree, it is unclear when it became conscious. While it is possible and fairly easy to test for sentience by seeing if something can something confirm its ability to see or hear something, it is impossible to test for consciousness in the same way. Conscious life is able to have thoughts and think in a way that sentient life was not. When considering consciousness it is helpful to try to draw a distinction between the overlapping conscious processes of feeling, thought and thinking.

Feelings (noun)
1. the general state of consciousness considered independently of particular sensations, thoughts, etc. 
2. a consciousness or vague awareness: a feeling of inferiority.

Thought (noun)
1. meditation, contemplation, or recollection: deep in thought.
2. intention, design, or purpose, especially a half-formed or imperfect intention: We had some thought of going.

Thinking (adjective & noun)
1. The action of using your mind to produce ideas
2. Way of reasoning; judgment:

Feelings are the rawest form of consciousness, feelings cannot truly be put into language. I can never sufficiently express to another being what it is to feel lonely or in love, my only hope is that they have had a similar experiences and my be able to relate in this way. Thoughts are a level of more specific contemplation above this. These are the level of consciousness between feelings and thoughts, which use a mixture of mental languages, some of which can be expressed to others, and are clearly defined and others which are neither of these things. Thinking is conscious contemplation using a much more clearly defined and understood language that can be clearly explained to someone else.  

It was only when life became conscious to the degree that thoughts, not just feelings were possible, that it began to learn and acquire knowledge though the more complex four stage model set out by Popper shown below.

1: Original Problem
2: Formation of Tentative Theories.
3: Attempts at Elimination (through critical discussion, including experimental testing).  
4: New Problems (which arise from the critical discussion of our theories).

Maybe life began conscious thought this model when homo habilis first appeared on the Animalia branch of life anything from 2.3 to 1.4 million years ago. It was certainly doing so to an impressive degree when the people of Mesopotamia (modern day Iraq) started writing down words, not just numbers around 3100-2900 BCE roughly 5000 years ago, at the stage life began to write it was clear that life was capable not just of thought but of clear rational thinking. 

This four stage model of scientific knowledge closely tied the language required to form tentative theories. It is also arguably closely tied to mathematics. Organisms awareness of mathematics could well predate anything we would consider the beginning of the intelligent life, or even hominids themselves. Prehistoric people certainly may have been aware of counting, as shown by the tallies found on bones. More complex mathematics didn’t appear until around 3000 BCE though with the Babylonians and Egyptans who used arithmetic, algebra and geometry for taxation and other financial calculations along with building and construction.

Before delving any further into what changes took place in moving from the ‘Age of Sentient Life’ to the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ and how this new four stage model of knowledge and learning changed things however it is worth examining exactly what we mean when we are talking about language and mathematics.

Language (noun)
1. Communication of thoughts and feelings through a system of arbitrary signals, such as voice sounds, gestures, or written symbols.
2. words of a particular kind.

Language is an ability seemingly unique to homo sapiens to acquire and use complex systems of communication, and a language is any specific example of such a system. The assertion that language is unique to homo sapiens has been disputed as animals use verbal communication to indicate danger, food, sexual arousal and a host of other things. They have a systems of communication that arguably include nouns, adjectives and verbs. For example a Meerkat can communicate the concepts of not just danger but specifically an aerial predator with either low, high or medium urgency or a terrestrial predator with low, high or medium urgency. Bottlenose dolphins discuss their names, ages, gender and location with each other across the miles of the ocean. 

Some people argue that a distinction however can be drawn between communication and language. To qualify as a language the system of communication must meet these six criteria.

1. Arbitrariness: there is no rational relationship between a sound or sign and its meaning, e.g. there is nothing intrinsically "housy" about the word "house".
2. Discreteness: language is composed of small, repeatable parts, discrete units, that are used in combination to create meaning.
3. Displacement: languages can be used to communicate ideas about things that are not in the immediate vicinity either spatially or temporally.
4. Duality of patterning: the smallest meaningful units (words, morphemes) consist of sequences of units without meaning (speech sounds morphemes). This is also known as called Double articulation.
5. Productivity: users can understand and create an indefinitely large number of utterances.
6. Semanticity: specific signals have specific meanings.

While some animal forms of communication may occasionally display all 6 of these requirements for definition as a language, none have the depth of vocabulary human languages have. It is certainly true to say that complex language is unique to people, even if language is not.

Mathematics (noun)
1. A group of related sciences, including algebra, geometry, and calculus, concerned with the study of number, quantity, shape, and space and their interrelationships by using a specialised notation.
2. Mathematical operations and processes involved in the solution of a problem or study of some scientific field
3. The study of the measurement, relationships, and properties of quantities and sets, using numbers and symbols. Arithmetic, algebra, geometry, and calculus are branches of mathematics.

Some people would argue incorrectly that maths is simply another language. This would be incorrect however, as all language refers to specific things and concepts, rooted ultimately in one of the realities we experience. While language may refer to more abstract concepts such as justice or love, these are all rooted in an experienced reality. To demonstrate this principle try imagining something described using non-mathematical terms that is totally abstract, rather than simply imaginary.

Mathematics refers to the totally abstract, but initially intuitively logical world of numbers and mathematical operations. These numbers can be classed as 

Counting numbers. 

Integer numbers.

Rational numbers.

Real numbers.

Complex numbers. 
(Complete later)

While there are a number of different mathematical operations, such as the integration or rearranging of an equation these are all rooted in and simple (and complex at times!!) variations and reversals of the two basic operations of addition and multiplication.

Now we have a clear idea of language and mathematics we can look at the birth of philosophy and science that took place during the ‘Age of Conscious Life’. Arguably once life began to use the four stage model, which Karl Popper describes as the scientific model, science was born. However it is only when wedded to a shared social complex language that this model becomes scientific in my mind. An octopus may be using this four stage model when it figures out how to unscrew a jar to get to the treat inside or a crow when it bends wire to use as a tool, without mentioning the intelligence displayed by other primates. Without a complex shared social language however stages two and three are undertaken by single individuals. 

1: Original Problem
2: Formation of Tentative Theories.
3: Attempts at Elimination (through critical discussion, including experimental testing).  
4: New Problems (which arise from the critical discussion of our theories).

With a complex language however individual are able to share their ideas with others, multiplying the mental processing power applied to the formation and elimination of theories. While this maybe the scientific method, science did not exist until philosophy had first come into being.

Philosophy (noun)

1. The study of the nature, causes, or principles of reality, knowledge, or values, based on logical reasoning.
2. A set of ideas about how to do something or how to live.

Philosophy is best defined quite simply thinking where you are able to show your working. Once you are thinking (not feeling or just having thoughts, but specifically thinking about something) in a way that you could clearly explain to another individual you are arguably engaging in a form of philosophy. It is possible to philosophise about if wine or beer is better or indeed no alcohol at all. It is possible to develop a philosophy about how to travel from your house to a friends. This is a very wide definition and means all fields of knowledge are ultimately philosophy.

By engaging in this four step model while philosophising, that is, setting out our thinking in a way that can be communicated to and understood by others, we are truly undertaking a scientific approach. As people began to utilise this scientific approach to understanding the world we saw the birth of civilisation and the start of the sixth age, the ‘Age of Civilisation’

Again, as with the ‘Age of Sentient Life’ and the ‘Age of Conscious Life’ it is hard to draw a line in history and say when the ‘Age of Civilisation’ began. It was roughly 50,000 years ago we belief full behavioural modernity, including language, music and other cultural universals had developed. I would draw the line for the start of the ‘Age of Civilisation’ when the first laws were established by people. This may in fact predate the written languages of the Mesopotamian and Egyptian people 5,000 years ago, but cannot predate the advent of complex language, a requisite for the communication of these laws. 

These first laws probably related to the hunter-gatherer existence that was universal for humans until around 10,000 years ago. They may have been religious or spiritual laws, regarding how the dead should be honoured, they may have been practical laws regarding how to deal with different predators. These laws were unlikely to have been universal or uncontested, even within social groups. The reason for the emergence of these laws was almost certainly practicality and self preservation and is rooted in the distinction between choices and decisions.

Choice (noun)
1. the act of picking or selecting from two or more possibilities
2.  a range of things that can be chosen

A choice is quite simply the point when something has to select between two or more options. This can be done consciously or unconsciously, my coin sorter can be thought of to choose between what coins to allow to fall through each slot.

Decision (noun)
1. A choice that you make about something after thinking about it : the result of deciding.
2. The ability to make choices quickly and confidently

A decision is when a choice is made after thinking by a conscious being. I do not decide to something if I have not actively considered the matter. I do not decide to swear when I bang my toe on the table, although I make a decision about if I should visit the doctors once the initial pain has subsided. Making decisions is often incredibly hard work, and is made much easier through the development conscious rules.

For example if I make a choice without thinking about if I should run or not from an animal I’m probably going to be okay. If I am injured after I escape though and trying to decided what plants to smear on the wound I probably need to make a decision not a choice. This decision is much more likely to be correct if I utilise the knowledge acquired through the four stage scientific model within my community. Out of this gradually rules of thumb emerge into laws. From this 




CRAP NOT USED BUT MAYBE USEFUL


Epistemology (noun)
1. a branch of philosophy that investigates the origin, nature, methods, and limits of human knowledge.
2.  the study or a theory of the nature and grounds of knowledge especially with reference to its limits and validity



Lets try to do a better job of answering the question “How many languages are there?” To do so, I think we need to do a better job of asking the question. As we have asked the question in English, so many assumptions have been made, that we need to unmake to have a chance of answering this question correctly. First of all there is an assumption that we are asking about the here  and now in the question rather than at another specific point in history, and along with this assumption is a lack of clarification if we are also asking about languages in the past. 





“How many languages are there?”

According to wikipedia attempts to estimate the number of languages in the world have varied between 5,000 and 7,000 depending on how you draw a distinction between a language and a dialect. Is English one or two languages with UK English and American English for example. Also there are a number of other problems such as do we count written and speaking languages together or separately. UK and US English are spelled differently, but spoken much more similarly, although the words have different meaning, for example pants and side walk. What about languages that are not written or spoken such as sign language?  Is sign language a separate language? What about Morse code, or semaphore? What about dead languages? If no one still speaks the language do we still count it?
